Add a blog post about QueueingHint (#43686)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-12-13-scheduler-queueinghint/index.md

## Scheduling queue

The scheduler stores all unscheduled Pods in an internal component that we call the Scheduling Queue.

The Scheduling Queue is composed of three data structures: ActiveQ, BackoffQ and Unschedulable Pod Pool.
- ActiveQ: It holds newly created Pods or Pods which are ready to be retried for scheduling.
- BackoffQ: It holds Pods which are ready to be retried, but are waiting for a backoff period, which depends on the number of times the scheduled attempted to schedule the Pod.
- Unschedulable Pod Pool: It holds Pods which should not be scheduled for now, because they have a Scheduling Gate or because the scheduler attempted to schedule them and nothing has changed in the cluster that could make the Pod schedulable.

## Scheduling framework and plugins

The Kubernetes scheduler is implemented following the Kubernetes
[scheduling framework](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/).

And, each scheduling requirements are implemented as a plugin.
(e.g., [Pod affinity](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity)
is implemented in the `PodAffinity` plugin.)

> The first phase, called the Scheduling Cycle, takes Pods from activeQ **one by one**, runs all plugins' logic,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first phase, called the _scheduling cycle_, takes Pods from activeQ **one by one**, runs all plugins' logic,
```

and lastly decides in which Node to run the Pod, or concludes that the Pod cannot go to anywhere for now.

> If the scheduling is successful, the second phase, called Binding Cycle, binds the Pod with the Node by communicating the decision to the apiserver.
> But, if it turns out that the Pod cannot go to anywhere in Scheduling Cycle, 
> Binding Cycle isn't executed, instead the Pod is moved back to Scheduling Queue.
> Although there are some exceptions, unscheduled Pods enter the Unschedulable Pod Pool.

Reviewer: I think this is more usual considering how we style our docs:
```suggestion
If the scheduling is successful, the second phase, called the _binding cycle_, binds the Pod with
the Node by communicating the decision to the API server.
But, if it turns out that the Pod cannot go to anywhere during the scheduling cycle,
the binding cycle isn't executed; instead the Pod is moved back to the scheduling queue.
Although there are some exceptions, unscheduled Pods enter the _unschedulable pod pool_.
```
What do you think?

Pods in Unschedulable Pod Pool are moved to ActiveQ/BackoffQ 
only when Scheduling Queue identifies changes in the cluster that might be schedulable if we retry the scheduling.

That is a crucial step because Scheduling Cycle is performed for Pods one by one -
if we didn't have Unschedulable Pod Pool and kept retrying the scheduling of any Pods, 
multiple Scheduling Cycles would be wasted for Pods with no chance to be scheduled.

Then, how do they decide when to move a Pod back into the ActiveQ? How do they notice that Pods might be schedulable now?
Here QueueingHints come into play.

## QueueingHint

QueueingHint is callback function per plugin to notice an object addition/update/deletion in the cluster (we call them cluster events)
that may make Pods schedulable.

Let's say the Pod `pod-a` has a required Pod affinity, and got rejected in scheduling cycle by the `PodAffinity` plugin
because no Node has any Pod matching the Pod affinity specification for `pod-a`.

![pod-a got rejected by PodAffinity](./queueinghint1.svg)

> When an unscheduled Pod is put into Unschedulable Pod Pool, Scheduling Queue records which plugins caused the scheduling failure of the Pod.
> In this example, Scheduling Queue notes that PodA was rejected by PodAffinity.

Reviewer: I'm puzzled. A queue is usually a data structure and not an actor that performs work.

Is “Scheduling Queue” the name of a component within the scheduler than performs action, or a list of Pods awaiting scheduling? I cannot guess.

```suggestion
When an unscheduled Pod is put into the unschedulable pod pool, the scheduling queue
records which plugins caused the scheduling failure of the Pod.
In this example, scheduling queue notes that `pod-a` was rejected by PodAffinity.
```

Author: Scheduling Queue is one of the most complicated part in the scheduler. So, it's called queue, but not just a data structure.
So, we call a component in the scheduler "Scheduling Queue" - it has activeQ, backoffQ, and unsched pod pool internally as described in this post, and also performs actions with them (like moving Pods based on cluster events, handling backoff, etc).

The Scheduling Queue uses the QueueingHints from plugins that rejected the Pod, which is PodAffinity in the example.

A QueueingHint subscribes to a particular kind of cluster event and make a decision whether an incoming event could make the Pod schedulable.
Thinking about when PodAffinity failure could be resolved,
one possible scenario is that an existing Pod gets a new label which matches with PodA's PodAffinity.

PodAffinity QueueingHint checks all Pod updates happening in the cluster, 
and when it catches such update, the scheduling queue moves PodA to activeQ/backoffQ.

![PodA is moved by PodAffinity QueueingHint](./queueinghint2.svg)

We actually already have a similar functionality called `preCheck` inside the scheduling queue,
which filter out cluster events based on Kubernetes core scheduling constraints - 
for example, filtering out node related events when nodes aren't ready.

But, it's not ideal because this hard-coded `preCheck` refers to in-tree plugins logic,
and it causes the issues for custom plugins ([#110175](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110175)).

## What's new in v1.29

> We have been working on the development of QueueingHint since v1.28.

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
Within SIG Scheduling, we have been working on the development of QueueingHint since
Kubernetes v1.28.
```

In v1.28, only one alpha plugin (DRA) supported QueueingHint,

> and in v1.29, some stable plugins start to implement QueueingHints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and in v1.29, some stable plugins started to implement QueueingHints.
```

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes v1.29: QueueingHint Brings a New Possibility to Optimize Our Scheduling"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes v1.29: QueueingHint Brings a New Possibility to Optimize Pod Scheduling"
```
?

date: 2023-12-13:00:00-08:00
slug: scheduler-queueinghint
---

**Author:** [Kensei Nakada](https://github.com/sanposhiho) (Mercari)

> The scheduler is the core component that decides which Node Pods run on.

Reviewer: (optionally)
```suggestion
The Kubernetes [scheduler](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/kube-scheduler/) is the core
component that decides which node any new Pods should run on.
```

Basically, it schedules Pods **one by one**, 
and thus the larger your cluster is, the more crucial the throughput of the scheduler is.

> The throughput of the scheduler is our eternal challenge, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Kubernetes project, the throughput of the scheduler has been an eternal challenge;
```

over the years, SIG Scheduling have been putting effort to improve the scheduling throughput by many enhancements.

In this blog post, I'll introduce a recent major improvement in the scheduler: a new
[scheduling context element](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#extension-points)
named _QueueingHint_.
We'll go through the explanation of the basic background knowledge of the scheduler,
and how QueueingHint improves our scheduling throughput.

## Scheduling queue

The scheduler stores all unscheduled Pods in an internal component that we call the Scheduling Queue.

> The Scheduling Queue is composed of three data structures: ActiveQ, BackoffQ and Unschedulable Pod Pool.

Reviewer: Try this, then:
```suggestion
The _scheduling queue_ is composed of three data structures: _ActiveQ_, _BackoffQ_ and _Unschedulable Pod Pool_.
```

> The scheduler stores all unscheduled Pods in an internal component that we call the Scheduling Queue.
> 
> The _scheduling queue_ is composed of three data structures: _ActiveQ_, _BackoffQ_ and _Unschedulable Pod Pool_.

Reviewer: We could move the emphasis a little earlier:
```suggestion
The scheduler stores all unscheduled Pods in an internal component that we - SIG Scheduling - 
call the _scheduling queue_.

The scheduling queue is composed of three data structures: _ActiveQ_, _BackoffQ_ and _Unschedulable Pod Pool_.
```

The Kubernetes scheduler is implemented following the Kubernetes
[scheduling framework](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/).

And, each scheduling requirements are implemented as a plugin.
(e.g., [Pod affinity](/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity)
is implemented in the `PodAffinity` plugin.)

The first phase, called the _scheduling cycle_, takes Pods from activeQ **one by one**, runs all plugins' logic,
and lastly decides in which Node to run the Pod, or concludes that the Pod cannot go to anywhere for now.

If the scheduling is successful, the second phase, called the _binding cycle_, binds the Pod with
the Node by communicating the decision to the API server.
But, if it turns out that the Pod cannot go to anywhere during the scheduling cycle,
the binding cycle isn't executed; instead the Pod is moved back to the scheduling queue.
Although there are some exceptions, unscheduled Pods enter the _unschedulable pod pool_.

Pods in Unschedulable Pod Pool are moved to ActiveQ/BackoffQ 
only when Scheduling Queue identifies changes in the cluster that might be schedulable if we retry the scheduling.

> That is a crucial step because Scheduling Cycle is performed for Pods one by one -
> if we didn't have Unschedulable Pod Pool and kept retrying the scheduling of any Pods, 
> multiple Scheduling Cycles would be wasted for Pods with no chance to be scheduled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is a crucial step because scheduling cycle is performed for Pods one by one -
if we didn't have Unschedulable Pod Pool and kept retrying the scheduling of any Pods, 
multiple scheduling cycles would be wasted for Pods that have no chance to be scheduled.
```
?

Then, how do they decide when to move a Pod back into the ActiveQ? How do they notice that Pods might be schedulable now?
Here QueueingHints come into play.

## QueueingHint

QueueingHint is callback function per plugin to notice an object addition/update/deletion in the cluster (we call them cluster events)
that may make Pods schedulable.

Let's say the Pod `pod-a` has a required Pod affinity, and got rejected in scheduling cycle by the `PodAffinity` plugin
because no Node has any Pod matching the Pod affinity specification for `pod-a`.

![pod-a got rejected by PodAffinity](./queueinghint1.svg)

When an unscheduled Pod is put into the unschedulable pod pool, the scheduling queue
records which plugins caused the scheduling failure of the Pod.

> In this example, scheduling queue notes that `pod-a` was rejected by PodAffinity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, scheduling queue notes that `pod-a` was rejected by `PodAffinity`.
```

`pod-a` will never be schedulable until the PodAffinity failure is resolved somehow.

> The Scheduling Queue uses the QueueingHints from plugins that rejected the Pod, which is PodAffinity in the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scheduling queue uses the queueing hints from plugins that rejected the Pod, which is `PodAffinity` in the example.
```

A QueueingHint subscribes to a particular kind of cluster event and make a decision whether an incoming event could make the Pod schedulable.
Thinking about when PodAffinity failure could be resolved,
one possible scenario is that an existing Pod gets a new label which matches with `pod-a`'s PodAffinity.

> PodAffinity QueueingHint checks all Pod updates happening in the cluster, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `PodAffinity` plugin's `QueueingHint` callback checks on all Pod updates happening in the cluster, 
```

> and when it catches such update, the scheduling queue moves `pod-a` to activeQ/backoffQ.

Reviewer: Did you mean:
```suggestion
and when it catches such update, the scheduling queue moves `pod-a` to either ActiveQ or BackoffQ.
```

![pod-a is moved by PodAffinity QueueingHint](./queueinghint2.svg)

> We actually already have a similar functionality called `preCheck` inside the scheduling queue,

Reviewer: ```suggested
We actually already had a similar functionality (called `preCheck`) inside the scheduling queue,
```
?

> which filter out cluster events based on Kubernetes core scheduling constraints - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which filters out cluster events based on Kubernetes core scheduling constraints - 
```

for example, filtering out node related events when nodes aren't ready.

But, it's not ideal because this hard-coded `preCheck` refers to in-tree plugins logic,
and it causes issues for custom plugins (for example: [#110175](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110175)).

## What's new in v1.29

Within SIG Scheduling, we have been working on the development of QueueingHint since
Kubernetes v1.28.
In v1.28, only one alpha plugin (DRA) supported QueueingHint,
and in v1.29, some stable plugins started to implement QueueingHints.

QueueingHint is not something user-facing, but we have a feature gate (`SchedulerQueueingHints`) as a safety net 
because QueueingHint changes a critical path of the scheduler and adds some memory overhead, depending on how busy a cluster is.

## Getting involved

These features are managed by Kubernetes [SIG Scheduling](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-scheduling).

Please join us and share your feedback. 

## How can I learn more?

> - [KEP-4247: Per-plugin callback functions for efficient requeueing in the scheduling queue](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-scheduling/4247-queueinghint/README.md)

Reviewer: I hope that for beta, or maybe GA, there is a document about how to use this in your custom scheduler that extends kube-scheduler.

Reviewer 2: IMO, that's beyond the scope of user docs.

Reviewer: Hmm.

If this isn't something we'll document: why is it important enough to announce in a blog article?

Author: I also think how to use is too much, while an overview is worthwhile for everyone.

Not only QueueingHint, but the scheduling framework in general is on the border between internal and user-facing. It's a very fundamental design and it could be important not only for custom-scheduler developers but also for everyone to understand how K8s scheduling works. So, we have a doc explaining an overview of the scheduling framework and each interface: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/
But, OTOH, we don't explain how to actually implement each interface in detail (e.g., Filter can return these statuses, etc), while the actual interfaces have comments explaining such detail (so, does QueueingHint). This is how the scheduling framework is explained currently, and IMO it's a good balance - If we explain everything about each interface in K8s doc, it'd be too huge to maintain and could be rotten very easily. Instead, comments in source code could be easily maintained with the implementation.

Talking about this blog post, it's also an overview of what QueueingHint does (it's like [this doc](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/43813) explains what each interface does, but a bit more detailed overview), but we deliberately don't go into an implementation detail or how the users can implement their QueueingHint for their custom schedulers.

![PodA is moved by PodAffinity QueueingHint](./queueinghint2.svg)

We actually already have a similar functionality called `preCheck` inside the scheduling queue,
which filter out cluster events based on Kubernetes core scheduling constraints - 
for example, filtering out node related events when nodes aren't ready.

But, it's not ideal because this hard-coded `preCheck` refers to in-tree plugins logic,

> and it causes the issues for custom plugins ([#110175](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110175)).

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
and it causes issues for custom plugins (for example: [#110175](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/110175)).
```
